Last updated: 9 December 2010

--------------------------------------------
The Topic Browser
Copyright 2010-2011 Brigham Young University
--------------------------------------------

This file is part of the Topic Browser <http://nlp.cs.byu.edu/topic_browser>.

The Topic Browser is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.

The Topic Browser is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Affero General Public License
for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License along
with the Topic Browser.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

If you have inquiries regarding any further use of the Topic Browser, please
contact the Copyright Licensing Office, Brigham Young University, 3760 HBLL,
Provo, UT 84602, (801) 422-9339 or 422-3821, e-mail copyright@byu.edu.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We also request that any published papers resulting from the use of this code
cite the following paper:

Matthew J. Gardner, Joshua Lutes, Jeff Lund, Josh Hansen, Dan Walker, Eric
Ringger, Kevin Seppi. "The Topic Browser: An Interactive Tool for Browsing
Topic Models".  In the Proceedings of the Workshop on Challenges of Data
Visualization, held in conjunction with the 24th Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2010). December 11, 2010. Whistler, BC,
Canada.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We welcome contributions to the code of this project.  At present the best way
to contribute is to email a patch to textmining@cs.byu.edu (if that contact
information goes out of date, the next place to look is at
http://nlp.cs.byu.edu/topic_browser).  For licensing purposes we ask that you
assign the copyright of any patch that you contribute to Brigham Young
University.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Further information, documentation, and a live demo of the code can be found at
the project website: http://nlp.cs.byu.edu/topic_browser.  We choose not to
repeat most of the documentation in the code itself, though we give some simple
instructions on how to run the code below.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The program requires django, django-admin, matplotlib and numpy to be installed.
django-admin needs to be installed for the django server to run.

Quick Start:

1) Run dodo.py as received in the code; it will run MALLET on a very small
example dataset that we distribute with the code, then load the results into
the browser database.
TODO(matt): pick a small example dataset (just a few documents) and make a
simple script for it.
          
2) Run the server with the following command:
python topic_modeling/manage.py runserver

3) Open a web browser and navigate to http://localhost:8000/

